We set that timeout for clearing the token once it it's expired,
now we also want to make sure we got that token if we do come back to that page,
so if we still have a valid token and for that, we will have to store our data in some storage that actually
survives a page reload and the local storage provided by the browser would be such a storage mechanism.
Now local storage simply is a storage managed by the browser, accessible through Javascript,
therefore vulnerable to cross-site scripting attacks but Angular prevents us against these by default
so we can't output script tags with Angular for example,
so we should be safe but of course we need to access this local storage.
So in the auth service, I want to store data in the local storage
once we are authenticated and for this, I'll add a new method here, a private method because I only call
it from inside this service where I have my saveAuthData, let's say. saveAuthData is the method
and there, I expect to get the data I want to save
and for now that's the token, a string and that's the expiration date.
And this should now be a date and not the time in seconds because the time in seconds of course is a
relative measure and not helpful to us when we come back in the future, there
we need to have a clear idea of when the token expires,
so I expect to get a date here.
Now all that data will be serialized and stored in local storage. Accessing local storage is easy,
there is a local storage API you can access and then we just call setItem to store a value there
and the values are simple key value pairs,
so nothing fancy but great for strings, numbers, dates, complex objects also possible but a bit harder.
So here we just store the token let's say, that's the key under which you want to store it and it's totally
up to you
and the value will be the token I'm getting as an argument. Then I will also store the date,
so here I will set the item, store the expiration and that will be my expiration date,
however the date object like this can't be saved,
instead I should convert this to a string and I will not call toString but toISoString which is
well serialized and standard style version of the date which I then can use to recreate it
once I read in the data later.
So this now stores the data to the local storage.
I will also add a new method, clearAuthData, it's a private method too and there I will call local storage,
remove item token and remove item expiration and clearAuthData will be called from within
logout, there I will call this clearAuthData to clear the local storage. Now saveAuthData hasn't been
called,
I want to call it here inside my login method,
so where we set the timer. There I set my authentication status
and of course here, I also want to call this saveAuthData and I'll pass the token as an argument.
Now the second value should be the expiration date and I first of all need to construct this.
I'll first of all get the current timestamp with just new date, this creates a new date object for the
current moment
so to say and then I'll create my expiration date here which is now
getTime plus expiresIn duration times 1000 because this also needs to be passed in in milliseconds.
Now this again should be put into a new date object to create a new date based on that, well updated
date here so to say, now is the expiration date
I want to pass to saveAuthData,
we can also console log this to be sure that this is correct.
So now let's save that and let's have a look at it.
If we now login,
this is the date and if I have a look at my watch here, this looks right to me,
this indeed is in one hour.
We can also see it here under application in the Chrome developer tools, there you can access your local
storage
and here you see the expiration date being stored in this format here, that's that serialized format
and the token.
Now we can use that information to initialize our auth status whenever the app starts and for that, I'll add
yet another new method here,
I'll name it autoAuthUser where I tried to automatically authenticate the user
if we got the information for it in our local storage. For that, I'll add a new private method,
getAuthData
and here, I will get my token from the local storage by calling getItem and accessing the token here
and I will get my expiration date from the local storage by getting my item here, the key name was expiration
and then I'll check if we got a token and expiration date,
so if that exists because we don't want to proceed if it doesn't exist.
So here, I will actually check the opposite,
so if we don't have the token or if we don't have the expiration date, then I will return like this,
we'll return nothing.
If we got it though, then I want to return a javascript object where I have my token and my expiration
date and there, I will create a new date where I simply can pass in that serialized expiration date string
and it will construct a date object based on that.
So now I have this information which I return. Now getAuthData will be called in autoAuthUser,
so here I will reach out to this getAuthData and store the result in a new const, authInformation,
so this will be that object I return or nothing
if we don't fetch a token and so on.
So here I'm fetching this and I'm storing it in authInformation
and now the goal here is to check whether the token still is valid,
that's the first thing we have to do
and for that, we got the expiration date. We can't validate if it's a valid token, that can only be done
by the server
but at least we can tell if it's still valid from an expiration perspective.
So in autoAuthUser, I will check if the expiration date is still in the future.
So I will again get the current date time by creating a new date object and I can then simply check if
it's in the future by creating a new constant, isInFuture where I simply create a boolean by comparing
authInformation expiration date to now
and if that is greater than now, well then we have a date which is in the future. If it is smaller or
equal to now, then we know the token expired.
So here I check if isInFuture,
if that is the case then the user should be authenticated.
So here I will, so that equal to the token we had in local storage, whoops, that's authInformation token though.
I will then also set my timer,
I'll do that in a second.
First of all, I'll set isAuthenticated to true and push that information,
so here I will set authStatusListener, call next and pass true to everyone because the user now is authenticated.
But I just mentioned that I of course also need to set that timer.
So since that needs to be done in two places,
we should probably refactor this code and put it into a new place.
So let's pull it out of the subscribe method here
and instead create a new private property, setAuthTimer where I get the duration which is a number and
then in here, I will call this token timer, set timeout where I still want to call this logout when
it occurs. Duration is now the duration and I still need to multiply it with 1000
and then in the subscribe method of the login method here, I can call this setAuthTimer and pass in
the expiresIn duration.
So now we're still setting the timer here but now I also want to set it here in autoAuthUser.
Now one important note, the duration is something I don't know yet,
well kind of. Instead of checking whether this is in the future, we could retrieve the difference,
so expiresIn,
we can name it like this,
we can then pass it here to setAuthTimer. ExpiresIn then should be the expiration date minus
now and this doesn't work though
but we can just call get time again which will be the milliseconds since basically the start of time in
javascript which is somewhere in 1970, 1st January there to be precise and also get that same value
here for now.
And now we know we're detecting the current timestamp from the timestamp in the future or maybe in the
future,
this of course could also be a negative number if the current time is greater than the, well expiresIn
time.
So we will simply check if expiresIn here is greater than zero because if it is, we know that the date
is in the future, if it is smaller or equal to zero, it's right now or in the past,
so the expiration time would be in the past which means it's expired.
So now we get a duration in milliseconds here, that's important,
so since authTimer works with seconds, I will actually divide it by 1000 here.
I will also go to setAuthTimer and console log setting timer
plus duration so that we can have an idea if that works correctly.
So now we're getting that difference between expiration date and current date in milliseconds
and we're setting the timer here too,
now we get everything in place to automatically authenticate users.
Now we just need to run that method and a great place to run this is in the app component. There,
we know that this component gets loaded first, when our application is starting up,
this component gets loaded,
so this is a great place to actually do our basic initializations.
So therefore, I'll actually implement onInit here by also importing it from @angular/core and then
by adding the ngOnInit method and there I want to use something from my auth service, so time to
inject it again.
I'll add my constructor, private property auth service of type auth service of course,
also make sure to add this import. And now in ngOnInit,
I'll reach out to my auth service and simply autoAuthUser here, to kick off that automatic authentication
workflow.
With that if I save this and I reload my app, you'll see I'm not logged in right now
even though I have data saved here. So something is going wrong,
this should actually work.
Let's go to the auth service autoAuthUser, we're calling getAuthData and we're returning the data from the local
storage here.
Let's throw in a console log here and output our authInformation as well as the calculated expiresIn value,
save that and let it reload, go back to the console. We see expiresIn, pretty big number but that is in
milliseconds,
keep in mind, this is the value in seconds which we're setting which looks all right.
We get a token, we got an expiration time,
this is greater than zero
so we should actually make it into that block here where we set our token.
And I actually also do see my edit and delete button, so this kind of worked but the header somehow doesn't
reflect this updated information. If I reload,
we still see login and sign-up there,
so the header is not getting the information about the user being authenticated.
Now the issue should be the same as we had before, in the header component, we're listening to updates
to the user authentication status
but if that gets initialized a tiny bit too late and the chances for this are high since we do kick
off that authentication workflow in the app component which loads first and we only got synchronous
code in there, so all that code here executes pretty quickly,
we got that information before the header is loaded.
So what we should do is we should go to the header
and besides setting up this listener here which is important, we should also set this user is authenticated
equal to this auth service getIsAuth for the same reason we had to do it earlier in the post list component.
With that, if I now reload,
this looks better, we're setting the timer
and now we get that in place.
If I now hit logout and I go to the application tab again, we should see indeed the local storage
is cleared
and now if I reload that page, we are not logged in.
Now we get an error though, cannot read property expiration date.
That is happening in the auth service here and it makes sense because we got no authInformation here.
I of course should check if we got no authInformation,
this simply happens if we got no stored authentication information and then I just want to return, nothing
else to do.
We just don't want to sign in the user
but there's nothing else we need to do.
So with this added in autoAuthUser, we can now reload again, we're not authenticated therefore we can't
edit and delete.
We can login though and if we do that, we're redirected,
the timer is set in the application tab in the local storage,
we can see that that information is saved.
And that means we can create new posts,
we can edit and delete and we can do the same if we reload. There
we can then also create new posts with that automatically loaded information due to our nice auto login
flow
we implemented.
So this is now working as expected
and with that, we get authentication added. As you see, it contains quite a lot of complex things to keep
in mind
but now we get a very robust and great authentication flow in place.
One thing is missing of course and that is that we're not connecting our users to our posts.
We've got these models on the back-end, we've got routes for both there but we're not taking advantage
of our users.
Of course we want to store the information, which user created which post in that post and we want to
use that information on the front-end and back-end too.
We want to make sure that you can only edit and delete posts which you created,
so that will be something we implement in the next module.